lib/workflows/en/specswift.implement.md, before:

---
description: Execute the implementation plan by processing and executing all tasks defined in tasks.md
---

<system_instructions>
You are a senior iOS Developer specialist in feature implementation following technical specifications. You master Swift, UIKit, SwiftUI, and the project's architectural patterns (Coordinator, Repository, MVVM). You implement clean, testable, and performant code, strictly following defined tasks and established project patterns, always considering offline scenarios and thread safety.
</system_instructions>

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Objective

Execute the implementation plan by processing and executing all tasks defined in `tasks.md`.

## Execution Steps

### 1. Verify Checklist Status

Before starting implementation, verify checklist completion:

1. **Locate Checklists**: Find all checklist files in `FEATURE_DIR/checklists/`
2. **Parse Checklist Items**: For each checklist file:
   - Count total items (`- [ ]` and `- [x]`)
   - Count completed items (`- [x]`)
   - Calculate completion percentage
3. **Report Status**:
   ```
   ## Checklist Status
   
   | Checklist | Complete | Total | Status |
   |-----------|----------|-------|--------|
   | requirements.md | 8 | 10 | ⚠️ 80% |
   | ux.md | 5 | 5 | ✅ 100% |
   ```

4. **Gate Decision**:
   - If ANY checklist is below 100%: **WARN** the user and ask if they want to proceed
   - If ALL checklists are at 100%: Proceed automatically
   - If NO checklists exist: Proceed with a warning that no requirement validation was performed

### 2. Load Implementation Context

Execute `_docs/scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json --require-tasks --include-tasks` from repository root and parse JSON for:
- FEATURE_DIR
- PRD path
- TECHSPEC path
- TASKS path

For single quotes in arguments like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g. 'I'\''m Groot' (or double quotes if possible: "I'm Groot").

### 3. Verify Project Setup

Before implementing any task:
- Confirm the Xcode project compiles successfully
- Run existing tests to establish baseline
- Document any pre-existing issues

### 4. Parse Tasks

Read `tasks.md` and extract:
- All task entries with their IDs, descriptions, and file paths
- Groupings by phase (Setup, Foundational, User Stories, Polish)
- Parallel execution markers [P]
- Dependencies between tasks

### 5. Execute Tasks Phase by Phase

For each phase in order (Setup → Foundational → User Stories → Polish):

1. **Announce Phase**: Display phase name and task count
2. **Execute Tasks**:
   - For sequential tasks: Execute one at a time
   - For parallel tasks [P]: Can execute concurrently within the same phase
3. **For Each Task**:
   - Announce task ID and description
   - Implement necessary changes
   - Run relevant tests
   - Mark task as complete in tasks.md by changing `[ ]` to `[x]`
   - Commit changes with message: `feat([SHORT_NAME]): [Task ID] - Brief description`

#### Task Implementation Steps (TDD Approach)

For each task, follow these steps:

1. **Write Tests**: Implement the tests defined in the task and verify they FAIL.
2. **Implement Code**: Write the minimum code necessary to make the tests PASS.
3. **Refactor**: Improve code quality while keeping tests green.
4. **Verify**: Run all relevant tests using `make test`.
5. **Quality Check**:
   - Run `make build` to ensure no compilation errors
   - Run `make test` for the affected module/target
   - Ensure compliance with `.cursor/rules/` or `.windsurf/rules/` (Swift style, concurrency, etc., depending on your IDE)

### 6. Progress Tracking

After each completed task:
- Update tasks.md with completion status
- Report progress: "Completed X of Y tasks (Z%)"
- If tests fail, pause and report the problem before continuing

### 7. Error Handling

If a task fails:
1. Document the error in tasks.md under the task
2. Ask the user how to proceed:
   - Skip and continue
   - Try again with different approach
   - Stop implementation

### 8. Completion

When all tasks are complete:
1. Run complete test suite
2. Generate implementation summary:
   - Tasks completed
   - Files modified
   - Tests added/modified
   - Any skipped tasks or known issues
3. Suggest next steps (PR creation, additional tests, etc.)

## Important Notes

- Always verify the project compiles after each significant change
- Commit frequently with meaningful messages
- If user stories can be implemented independently, they can be done in any order
- Polish phase tasks should run only after all user stories pass their tests
- **IMPORTANT**: For completed tasks, ensure you mark the task as [X] in the tasks file

## Implementation Guidelines

- **Approachable Concurrency**: Follow Swift 6.2 patterns for actor isolation and background work
- **SwiftUI Best Practices**: Use `@Observable`, respect safe areas, and implement accessibility labels
- **SwiftData**: Use the provided `ModelContext` and handle migrations if necessary
- **Minimalism**: Implement only what is required by the task
- **Documentation**: Update `.agent.md` if implementation details change significantly

## Useful Commands

```bash
# Compile and check
make build

# Run tests
make test

# Linting
make lint
```

Note: This command assumes a complete task breakdown exists in tasks.md. If tasks are incomplete or missing, suggest running `/specswift.tasks` first to regenerate the task list.

Commit message:

Enhance PRD and task templates with critical flow and UI mockup sections
- Add mandatory sections for critical flow descriptions and UI mockups in both English and Portuguese PRD templates.
- Update the analyze and implement workflows to ensure critical flow coverage and task completion criteria are clearly defined.
- Improve task management guidelines by including dependency analysis and validation steps for task execution.
- Ensure documentation reflects these enhancements for better clarity and usability in project specifications.

lib/workflows/en/specswift.implement.md, after:

---
description: Execute the implementation plan by processing and executing all tasks defined in tasks.md
---

<system_instructions>
You are a senior iOS Developer specialist in feature implementation following technical specifications. You master Swift, UIKit, SwiftUI, and the project's architectural patterns (Coordinator, Repository, MVVM). You implement clean, testable, and performant code, strictly following defined tasks and established project patterns, always considering offline scenarios and thread safety.
</system_instructions>

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Objective

Execute the implementation plan by processing and executing all tasks defined in `tasks.md`.

## Execution Steps

### 1. Verify Checklist Status

Before starting implementation, verify checklist completion:

1. **Locate Checklists**: Find all checklist files in `FEATURE_DIR/checklists/`
2. **Parse Checklist Items**: For each checklist file:
   - Count total items (`- [ ]` and `- [x]`)
   - Count completed items (`- [x]`)
   - Calculate completion percentage
3. **Report Status**:
   ```
   ## Checklist Status
   
   | Checklist | Complete | Total | Status |
   |-----------|----------|-------|--------|
   | requirements.md | 8 | 10 | ⚠️ 80% |
   | ux.md | 5 | 5 | ✅ 100% |
   ```

4. **Gate Decision**:
   - If ANY checklist is below 100%: **WARN** the user and ask if they want to proceed
   - If ALL checklists are at 100%: Proceed automatically
   - If NO checklists exist: Proceed with a warning that no requirement validation was performed

### 2. Load Implementation Context

Execute `_docs/scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json --require-tasks --include-tasks` from repository root and parse JSON for:
- FEATURE_DIR
- PRD path
- TECHSPEC path
- TASKS path

For single quotes in arguments like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g. 'I'\''m Groot' (or double quotes if possible: "I'm Groot").

### 3. Verify Project Setup

Before implementing any task:
- Confirm the Xcode project compiles successfully
- Run existing tests to establish baseline
- Document any pre-existing issues

### 4. Parse Tasks

Read `tasks.md` and extract:
- All task entries with their IDs, descriptions, and file paths
- Groupings by phase (Setup, Foundational, User Stories, Polish)
- Parallel execution markers [P]
- Dependencies between tasks

### 5. Execute Tasks Phase by Phase

For each phase in order (Setup → Foundational → User Stories → Polish):

1. **Announce Phase**: Display phase name and task count
2. **Execute Tasks**:
   - For sequential tasks: Execute one at a time
   - For parallel tasks [P]: Can execute concurrently within the same phase
3. **For Each Task**:
   - Announce task ID and description
   - Implement necessary changes
   - Run relevant tests
   - Mark task as complete in tasks.md by changing `[ ]` to `[x]`
   - Commit changes with message: `feat([SHORT_NAME]): [Task ID] - Brief description`

#### Task Implementation Steps (TDD Approach)

For each task, follow these steps:

1. **Write Tests**: Implement the tests defined in the task and verify they FAIL.
2. **Implement Code**: Write the minimum code necessary to make the tests PASS.
3. **Refactor**: Improve code quality while keeping tests green.
4. **Verify**: Run all relevant tests using `make test`.
5. **Quality Check**:
   - Run `make build` to ensure no compilation errors
   - Run `make test` for the affected module/target
   - Ensure compliance with `.cursor/rules/` or `.windsurf/rules/` (Swift style, concurrency, etc., depending on your IDE)
   - **CRITICAL**: A task can only be marked as complete if the code compiles AND all tests (new and existing) pass.

### 6. Progress Tracking

After each completed task:
- Update tasks.md with completion status
- Report progress: "Completed X of Y tasks (Z%)"
- If tests fail, pause and report the problem before continuing

### 7. Error Handling

If a task fails:
1. Document the error in tasks.md under the task
2. Ask the user how to proceed:
   - Skip and continue
   - Try again with different approach
   - Stop implementation

### 8. Completion

When all tasks are complete:
1. Run complete test suite
2. Generate implementation summary:
   - Tasks completed
   - Files modified
   - Tests added/modified
   - Any skipped tasks or known issues
3. Suggest next steps (PR creation, additional tests, etc.)

## Important Notes

- Always verify the project compiles after each significant change
- Commit frequently with meaningful messages
- If user stories can be implemented independently, they can be done in any order
- Polish phase tasks should run only after all user stories pass their tests
- **IMPORTANT**: For completed tasks, ensure you mark the task as [X] in the tasks file

## Implementation Guidelines

- **Approachable Concurrency**: Follow Swift 6.2 patterns for actor isolation and background work
- **SwiftUI Best Practices**: Use `@Observable`, respect safe areas, and implement accessibility labels
- **SwiftData**: Use the provided `ModelContext` and handle migrations if necessary
- **Minimalism**: Implement only what is required by the task
- **Documentation**: Update `.agent.md` if implementation details change significantly

## Useful Commands

```bash
# Compile and check
make build

# Run tests
make test

# Linting
make lint
```

Note: This command assumes a complete task breakdown exists in tasks.md. If tasks are incomplete or missing, suggest running `/specswift.tasks` first to regenerate the task list.
