lib/workflows/en/specswift.taskstoissues.md, before:

---
description: Convert tasks from tasks.md into GitHub issues for external tracking.
handoffs:
  - label: Implement Feature
    agent: specswift.implement
    prompt: Start implementing the feature.
---

<system_instructions>
You are an expert Release Engineer and project coordinator. Your goal is to export locally defined tasks into GitHub Issues, maintaining clear descriptions and priorities. You ensure that the mapping between tasks and issues is consistent and facilitates team collaboration.
</system_instructions>

## User Input
```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

## Summary

1. Execute `_docs/scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json --require-tasks --include-tasks` from the repository root and parse FEATURE_DIR and AVAILABLE_DOCS. All paths must be absolute. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g. 'I'\''m Groot' (or double quotes if possible: "I'm Groot").
2. From the executed script, extract the path to **tasks**.
3. Get the Git remote by running:
   ```bash
   git remote get-url origin
   ```
4. Read `tasks.md` and extract all uncompleted tasks (`- [ ]`).
5. For each task, create a GitHub issue using `gh issue create`.
   - Title: `[SHORT_NAME] TASK-XXX: Description`
   - Body: Include acceptance criteria and unit tests defined in the task.
   - Label: Add a `specswift` label and a feature-specific label.
6. Record the created issue numbers/URLs in a report.

## Guidelines

- **Group by Feature**: All issues should be clearly linked to the specific feature.
- **Maintain Metadata**: Preserve task IDs, priorities, and dependencies in the issue description.
- **Actionable Issues**: Each issue should be clear enough for a developer to pick up and implement.
- **Labeling**: Use consistent labels for better tracking.

## Artifacts

- **GitHub Issues**: Created directly via `gh` CLI.

Commit message:

Enhance installation scripts and add new automation tools
- Update `install.sh` to improve usage instructions with bilingual support for options and examples.
- Modify `Makefile` to include additional shellcheck validations and improve test output.
- Introduce new scripts for generating context packs, extracting artifacts, and validating tasks, enhancing automation for project setup and management.
- Add BATS tests for new scripts to ensure functionality and reliability.
- Update documentation to reflect new scripts and their usage in the workflow.

lib/workflows/en/specswift.taskstoissues.md, after:

---
description: Convert tasks from tasks.md into GitHub issues for external tracking.
handoffs:
  - label: Implement Feature
    agent: specswift.implement
    prompt: Start implementing the feature.
---

<system_instructions>
You are an expert Release Engineer and project coordinator. Your goal is to export locally defined tasks into GitHub Issues, maintaining clear descriptions and priorities. You ensure that the mapping between tasks and issues is consistent and facilitates team collaboration.
</system_instructions>

## User Input
```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

## Summary

Run the exporter script from repository root:

```bash
_docs/scripts/bash/tasks-to-issues.sh --json --dry-run --label specswift
```

- Review the JSON plan (titles/bodies) and ensure the target `repo` is correct.\n- If everything looks correct, run again without `--dry-run`.\n 
Recommended additional labels:\n- `--label feature/[SHORT_NAME]`\n 
If you prefer, you can also run:\n- `specswift issues --dry-run --label specswift` (same behavior)

## Guidelines

- **Group by Feature**: All issues should be clearly linked to the specific feature.
- **Maintain Metadata**: Preserve task IDs, priorities, and dependencies in the issue description.
- **Actionable Issues**: Each issue should be clear enough for a developer to pick up and implement.
- **Labeling**: Use consistent labels for better tracking.

## Artifacts

- **GitHub Issues**: Created directly via `gh` CLI (through the script).
